Add docs for zpages (#48760)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/instrumentation/zpages.md

---
reviewers:
- richabanker
title: Kubernetes z-pages
content_type: reference

> weight: 20

Reviewer: Is this right? I'd put it last in the section.

Author: Moved to the last section. @dashpole added you as the reviewer, could you take a look please?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight: 60
```
This will make it appear last in the list.

---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.32" state="alpha" >}}

> Kubernetes core components expose a suite of z-endpoints to make it easier for users to debug their components. As of 1.32, these endpoints only support plain text format and are strictly to be used for human inspection to gain real time debugging information of a component binary. Avoid automated scraping of data returned by these endpoints since they are introduced as alpha features and their format may change in future releases.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes core components can expose a suite of _z-endpoints_ to make it easier for users
to debug their cluster and its components. These endpoints are strictly to be used for human
inspection to gain real time debugging information of a component binary.
Avoid automated scraping of data returned by these endpoints; in Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}}
these are an **alpha** feature and the response format may change in future releases.
```

<!-- body -->

## z-pages

> Kubernetes now includes "z-pages" to help you troubleshoot problems with its core control plane components. These special debugging endpoints provide internal information about running components. Currently we have the following endpoints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v{{< skew currentVersion >}} allows you to enable _z-pages_ to help you troubleshoot
problems with its core control plane components. These special debugging endpoints provide internal
information about running components. For Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}}, components
serve the following endpoints (when enabled):
```

- [z-pages](#z-pages)

>   - [statusz](#statusz)
>   - [flagz](#flagz)

Reviewer: Is this right:
```suggestion
  - [`/statusz`](#statusz)
  - [`/flagz`](#flagz)
```
?

### statusz

> Enabled using the ComponentStatusz feature gate, statusz endpoint displays the high level information about the component such as its Kubernetes version, emulation version, start time and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabled using the `ComponentStatusz` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/),
the `/statusz` endpoint displays high level information about the component such as its Kubernetes version, emulation version, start time and more.
```

> The statusz data for apiserver looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `/statusz` response from the API server is similar to:
```

```
kube-apiserver statusz
Warning: This endpoint is not meant to be machine parseable, has no formatting compatibility guarantees and is for debugging purposes only.

Started: Wed Oct 16 21:03:43 UTC 2024
Up: 0 hr 00 min 16 sec
Go version: go1.23.2
Binary version: 1.32.0-alpha.0.1484&#43;5eeac4f21a491b-dirty
Emulation version: 1.32.0-alpha.0.1484
```

### flagz

> Enabled using the ComponentFlagz feature gate, the flagz endpoint shows you the command line flags that were used to start a component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabled using the `ComponentFlagz` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/), the `/flagz` endpoint shows you the command line arguments that were used to start a component.
```

Reviewer: Although Go calls all command line arguments "flags", this isn't true across the world of IT. In documentation (not just K8s) I consistently call for the more widely recognized term. We can still talk about flagz when talking about the endpoint.

> The flagz data for apiserver looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `/flagz` data for the API server looks something like:
```

```
kube-apiserver statusz
Warning: This endpoint is not meant to be machine parseable, has no formatting compatibility guarantees and is for debugging purposes only.

Started: Wed Oct 16 21:03:43 UTC 2024
Up: 0 hr 00 min 16 sec
Go version: go1.23.2
Binary version: 1.32.0-alpha.0.1484&#43;5eeac4f21a491b-dirty
Emulation version: 1.32.0-alpha.0.1484
```

### flagz

Enabled using the `ComponentFlagz` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/), the `/flagz` endpoint shows you the command line arguments that were used to start a component.

The `/flagz` data for the API server looks something like:

```
kube-apiserver flags
Warning: This endpoint is not meant to be machine parseable, has no formatting compatibility guarantees and is for debugging purposes only.

advertise-address=192.168.8.2
contention-profiling=false
enable-priority-and-fairness=true
profiling=true
authorization-mode=[Node,RBAC]
authorization-webhook-cache-authorized-ttl=5m0s
authorization-webhook-cache-unauthorized-ttl=30s
authorization-webhook-version=v1beta1
default-watch-cache-size=100
```

---
reviewers:
- dashpole
title: Kubernetes z-pages
content_type: reference
weight: 20

> ---

Reviewer: The [front matter](https://gohugo.io/content-management/front-matter/) needs to come first in the file; that's what Hugo expects.

Author: Ah clearly misunderstood your [previous comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/48760#discussion_r1855648814). Tried to fix now, is this better?
